
       *   * ***** *   * ***** ***** * **** 
       **  * *      * *    *   *     * *   *
       * * * *****   *     *   ***** * *   *
       *  ** *      * *    *       * * *   *
       *   * ***** *   *   *   ***** * *****
       *
       *



                            Build v1.0c 03/07/2021

                           (c)2021 9bitcolor/em00k



  About

Next SID Interface is a free mouse-driven audio
application for the ZX Spectrum Next. It showcases
'NextSID', a three-channel audio processing engine
for the built-in AY/YM programmable sound
generators.

NextSID filters the tone and volume of the PSG
using custom waveforms defined in the app. The
default pattern for each of the three channels is
set to a two-sample squarewave, characterising
NextSID's signature sound.

NextSID will produce 'phat' tones when complex
waveform patterns are applied to a channel.

The engine does not attempt to emulate the C-64
legendary SID chip but does belong to a similar
class of players found in the Atari ST demo scene.

--------------------------------------------------

  Operation

The mouse-driven user interface displays the
parameters for NextSID on a single screen for
convenience. A browser for the built-in PT3 songs
can be opened by clicking the disk icon.

The mouse pointer will change to a black arrow or
cross-hair when hovering above a clickable region
of the UI. The Left and right mouse buttons are
used to change parameters and select options.

Cursor keys navigate options and this user guide.
Keyboard shortcuts are also implemented.

The enter key restarts the app, resetting channel
defaults but preserves the current song selection.

--------------------------------------------------

  User interface

The display contains six regions;

  1. Top row; System status
  2. Top middle; Visualizer
  3. Far left; Icons
  4. Far right; Channel settings
  5. Main; Waveform grid/song browser/user guide
  6. Bottom row; Song name/tooltip message


  1. System status

The ZX Spectrum Next system and app status is
displayed at the top of the screen. Video refresh
rate and machine timing options can be changed.

This user guide is viewed in the app by clicking
the version number at the top right of the screen.
Cursor keys UP/DOWN/LEFT/RIGHT navigate the text.


  2. Visualizer

A visualizer is displayed near the top of the
screen with two main modes.

A 112 band analyser mode shows the PSG's spectrum
for active channels.

The channel mode displays customisable analysers
for each of the three PSG channels. Channels set
to PSG display the spectrum as above. Channels
with SID enabled simulate the effect of the
waveform pattern data on the PSG's tone and
amplitude.


  3. Icons

Four icons can be found at the left of the screen;

  DISK: Open song browser
  WAVE: Visualizer mode
  LOOP: Song loop ON/OFF
  PLAY: Pause/play current song


  4. Channel settings

The three PSG channels are named A, B, C. Their
settings can be found to the right of the screen.

Three modes exist for each channel, configurable
with a mouse button click;

   OFF: The channel is muted
        - outputs silence
   PSG: The default tone of the PSG
        - bypasses all parameters
   SID: Waveform and tuning are applied
        - affects the timbre and volume

The cursor keys can be used to move the selection
bar through the options and edit their values. The
mouse can also be used to select and edit the
values.

Keyboard shortcuts A, B, C can be used to select
the channel.


The following five settings are as follows;

  WAVE: Waveform edit status **READ ONLY**;
        default/user
  DUTY: Waveform 'duty cycle' sample length;
        2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 16, 32
TUNING: Master PSG tuning in semitones;
        A, A#, C, C#, D, D#, E, F, F#, G, G#
OCTAVE: Master PSG tuning in octaves;
        -3, -2, -1, 0, +1, +2, +3
DETUNE: 16-bit signed value applied to the SID
        period

The default tuning is set to A-4.

Please note that setting the octave and tuning
too high can produce frequencies beyond the range
of the engine - case by case for each song.

The detune option can be reset to zero by clicking
the third mouse button on compatible input
devices, this would be a scroll wheel press in
most cases.


  5. Main

The main central display shows the waveform
editing grid for the currently selected channel -
matching the cursor highlight bar. The default
start-up channel selection is set to B.

A status bar above the waveform displays the
sample value, grid coordinates, channel selection 
and configurable PSG modes.

The red bars in the grid represent the waveform
pattern data. The left mouse button is used to
drag the bars to define a sample range between 1
and 128 - this changes the sound and volume of the
currently selected channel when set to 'SID' mode.

The right mouse button resets the pattern waveform
to the default repeating squarewave.

It should be noted that odd length pattern sizes
may cause a detune effect.


  6. Tooltips

Tooltips are displayed at the bottom of the
screen. The default message shows the current PT3
song name. The song can be changed by clicking the
'PT3:' text with the left or right mouse button.

--------------------------------------------------

  Error messages

The application will display a stop screen with a
message if it encounters an unrecoverable error.

Many of the errors relate to SD card operation.
The remaining errors deal with core and NextZXOS
compatibility.

Emulators may trigger a stop screen. Use the -emu
command line switch when running under CSpect.

--------------------------------------------------

  How does it work?

The ZX Spectrum Next's Counter/Timer Circuit (CTC)
is used to rapidly modify the PSG's amplitude. The
CTC also provides a rock-solid playback tempo no
longer tied to the video display.

NextSID has two modules - the PT3 player codebase
extension and the timer driven PSG processor.

The popular VT1-MFX ZX Spectrum music player was
chosen to drive NextSID. Our engine is hooked into
the PSG output stage of the player at code level.
The data sent to the PSG registers by VT1-MFX
tunes the timer amplitude processor. Note, NextSID
cannot modulate channels using envelope mode.

Waveform patterns provide < 50% duty cycle data -
modulating the PSG squarewaves.

The result is enhanced timbre, adding character
to the default PSG tones.

NextSID uses an average of 9-15% CPU @ 28Mhz.

--------------------------------------------------

  FAQ

  1. NextSIDi is provided 'as is'.
  2. Permission is granted to distribute NextSIDi
     free of charge.
  3. The 'Ice World' wallpaper artwork is subject
     to copyright.
  4. The app contains a modified version of the
     VT1-MFX PT3 player. No claim is ever made by
     the developers to have written VT1-MFX.
  5. Copyright is retained by the authors of the
     included PT3 files.
  6. NextSIDi is compatible with 1MB ZX Spectrum
     Nexts running core 3.01.10 or above.
  7. NextSIDi may not function as intended under
     emulation.
  8. Binaries and source code for the engine are
     available upon request.
  9. You can contact us online through the
     official ZX Spectrum Next Facebook group.

--------------------------------------------------

I would like to give a massive thank you to em00k
for inspiring me to create this fun project.

I would also like to thank Allen Albright for
adding CTC timers to the ZX Spectrum Next core -
making NextSID possible.

Respect to the developers of the VT1-MFX player
and the composers of the included PT3 files.

9bitcolor.



